# Response to Joshua Blumenstock's article

## Irene Liu
   (1/28/20)

Blumenstock began the article by mentioning that big data has a lot of potential to be used for the greater good on a global scale, but there are currently a couple pitfalls. Some of the ones he mentioned were corruption within governments or those in power who have access to the big data, inability for some algorithms to update and adapt to constantly-changing environments, and bias within social institutions can lead to misleading results. The problem that stuck out to me the most was that many people who live in poverty or lower income countries don't have access to information or education that would allow them to be able to interpret what data made available to them for their own benefit. Luckily, Blumenstock mentioned that larger companies like Google and Facebook, higher level institutions, and data science conferences are making this education available to those who need it to teach technical capacity to locals who wouldn't normally have access to any of these resources. Besides this development, Blumenstock also gave a few other ideas for moving forward like better collaboration between parties with the resources to develop data and those directly affected by third-world issues, making sure new sources of data complement old ones and change as needed instead of just outrightly replacing them, and customizing algorithms that already exist in our everyday lives to address specific needs.

When it comes to acquiring and using data, information is usually put in the hands of the somewhat wealthy and privileged. Because of this phenomenon, data scientists trying to find solutions to problems in third-world countries or environments they aren't familiar with won't be able to help to the fullest extent since they have no firsthand experience in many of the situations they are trying to solve. Wanting to help but not being pressed to and knowing exactly what people need and having a true understanding of an issue are two very different things, especially when people's lives are at stake. Transparency and fostering connections between those in power, those who have the ability to solve an issue with technology or data, those who are finding ways to physically help, and those actually facing the problem will make solving these issues a lot more efficent. If scientists and data scientists make any information they discover readily available to the public for use and have people help interpret it and put it to use while those in need make their problems and necessary solutions known, many more issues can be solved, so I agree with the fact that transparency can help both sides of an issue.

In a perfect world, those who are able to process and find data would put their findings to good use. Unfortunately, a lot of larger companies or those in less developed countries who hold the most power might use this data for personal profit instead of for the greater good. This causes a lot of issues to remain unsolved since even though the data or solutions might be there and ready to use, they'll be used for more selfish reasons. Another issue in developing countries is the representation of its people to data scientists looking at statistics from behind a screen. In the article, Blumenstock mentioned that, "Globally, the most disadvantaged people tend to be the least represented in new sources of digital data" (Blumenstock 172). Those with less privilege and no access to any kind of technology might be a majority of the population in a certain country or area, but those with power and access to technology can be mistaken as representative of that area. This issue is easier to solve, however, as data scientists strive to do more thorough and inclusive research to give those in poverty or with less advantages more aid.
